J017384601 1 Document name specification Title of the invention Semiconductor integrated circuit, oscillator, electronic device, and moving object TECHNICAL FIELD The present invention relates to a semiconductor integrated circuit, an oscillator, an electronic device, and a moving object.
BACKGROUND ART In recent years, an oscillator equipped with a SAW resonator using a surface acoustic wave (SAW) has been used in high-speed network communication, mobile communication fields, and the like.
The SAW resonator can extract a high-frequency signal using a surface acoustic wave by providing an IDT electrode (comb-shaped electrode) on a piezoelectric substrate made of, for example, quartz.
The speed of the surface acoustic wave is determined by the type of the piezoelectric substrate. In the SAW resonator, a signal having a higher oscillation frequency can be obtained as the period of the comb-shaped electrode is reduced.
Therefore, the SAW resonator can easily cope with high frequencies and can be downsized.
For example, Patent Document 1 discloses an oscillator that can be made smaller and thinner than before by arranging a SAW resonator (a surface acoustic wave element piece in Patent Document 1) on a thick bottom and an electronic component on a thin bottom. (Patent Document 1 proposes a piezoelectric device).
Prior Art Document Patent Document Patent Document 1 JP 2006-245994 A Summary of the Invention Problems to be Solved by the Invention However, in the oscillator described in Patent Document 1, when it is desired to input an output signal to a plurality of ICs, It is necessary to split the output in the fan-out buffer, and the long wiring to the fan-out buffer may cause skew, degrade the jitter characteristics, or degrade the jitter characteristics of the output signal inside the fan-out buffer. is there.
In addition, the use of the fan-out buffer may cause skew due to the wiring length inside the fan-out buffer.
The present invention has been made in view of the above, and according to some aspects of the present invention, it is possible to reduce the deterioration of jitter characteristics even when inputting an output signal to a plurality of circuits. A semiconductor integrated circuit can be provided, and according to some embodiments of the present invention, a highly reliable oscillator, an electronic device, and a moving object using the semiconductor integrated circuit can be provided.
Means for Solving the Problems The present invention has been made to solve at least a part of the problems described above, and can be realized as the following aspects or application examples.
[Application Example 1] J017384601 2 A semiconductor integrated circuit according to this application example includes an oscillation unit that oscillates a vibrating element to generate an oscillation signal, a first output unit that outputs a signal based on the oscillation signal, and a second An output unit; and a control unit that controls the first output unit and the second output unit.
The vibrating element is, for example, a SAW (Surface Acoustic Wave) resonator, an AT-cut crystal resonator, an SC-cut crystal resonator, a tuning fork-type crystal resonator, another piezoelectric resonator, a MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical Systems) resonator, or the like. is there.
Each of the first output circuit and the second output circuit may output one signal or may output different signals.
Further, each of the output signals may be a differential signal or a single-ended signal.
The control unit controls the state of the output signal, such as a state in which a signal is output from each output unit or no signal is output, and a type of a signal output from each output unit.
According to the semiconductor integrated circuit according to this application example, the oscillation unit, the first output unit, and the second output unit included in a single semiconductor integrated circuit generate at least two low-jitter signals based on the oscillation signal. Since the signals can be output, if these at least two signals are respectively supplied to at least two circuits, there is no need to provide a fan-out buffer configured by a semiconductor integrated circuit separate from the oscillation unit.
Therefore, even if the output signal is input to a plurality of circuits, it is possible to reduce the deterioration of the jitter characteristic.
Application Example 2 A semiconductor integrated circuit according to this application example includes an oscillation circuit that oscillates a vibrating element to generate an oscillation signal on a semiconductor substrate, a first output circuit that outputs a signal based on the oscillation signal, and A second output circuit; and a control unit that controls operations of the first output circuit and the second output circuit.
The vibrating element is, for example, a SAW (Surface Acoustic Wave) resonator, an AT-cut crystal resonator, an SC-cut crystal resonator, a tuning fork-type crystal resonator, another piezoelectric resonator, a MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical Systems) resonator, or the like. is there.
Each of the first output circuit and the second output circuit may output one signal or may output different signals.
Further, each of the output signals may be a differential signal or a single-ended signal.
The signal output state of each output circuit and the type of signal output from each output circuit are controlled by the control unit.
Further, the operation of each output circuit, such as a state in which a signal is output from each output circuit or no signal is output, and a setting of a type of a signal output from each output circuit, are controlled by the control unit. .
According to the semiconductor integrated circuit according to the application example, the oscillation circuit, the first output circuit, and the second output circuit included in the semiconductor integrated circuit output at least two signals with low jitter based on the oscillation signal. Therefore, if these at least two signals are supplied to at least two circuits J017384601 3, there is no need to provide an external fan-out buffer for branching.
Therefore, even if the output signal is input to a plurality of circuits, it is possible to reduce the deterioration of the jitter characteristic.
Further, when a circuit at a subsequent stage of the semiconductor integrated circuit according to the application example needs an output signal from the first output circuit, for example, the output signal from the second output circuit is stopped, or the state is changed to a high impedance state. By controlling whether or not to do so, flexible usage is possible.
Application Example 3 In the semiconductor integrated circuit according to the application example, the control unit may independently control operations of the first output circuit and the second output circuit.
According to the semiconductor integrated circuit of this application example, since the operation of the first output circuit and the operation of the second output circuit can be controlled independently, for example, only the output signal from the first output circuit is required. In this case, a flexible usage such as stopping the output signal from the second output circuit or setting a high impedance state is possible.
Application Example 4 In the semiconductor integrated circuit according to the application example, the semiconductor integrated circuit includes a first power supply terminal and a second power supply terminal, and the first output circuit includes the first power supply terminal. A power supply voltage may be supplied from a power supply terminal, and the second output circuit may be supplied with a power supply voltage from the second power supply terminal.
According to the semiconductor integrated circuit of this application example, since the power supply terminals of the first output circuit and the second output circuit are separated, the noise of one signal rides on the other signal via the power supply. Can be reduced.
Further, according to the semiconductor integrated circuit according to the application example, when the subsequent circuit requires only the output signal from, for example, the first output circuit, the supply of the power supply voltage from the second power supply terminal may be stopped. Will be possible.
Therefore, unnecessary power consumption can be suppressed.
Application Example 5 In the semiconductor integrated circuit according to the application example, the semiconductor integrated circuit may include a first frequency divider that divides the oscillation signal to generate a first frequency-divided signal; A second frequency divider that divides the frequency-divided signal to generate a second frequency-divided signal, wherein the first frequency-divider circuit is supplied with a power supply voltage from the first power supply terminal, A signal based on the first frequency-divided signal is output to the first output circuit, and the second frequency-divider circuit is supplied with a power supply voltage from the second power supply terminal, and outputs the second frequency-divided signal. May be output to the second output circuit.
According to the semiconductor integrated circuit according to this application example, the frequency of the output signal from the first output circuit and the output from the second output circuit are determined by setting the first frequency divider and the second frequency divider. The signal frequency can be different from J017384601 4.
Therefore, a plurality of circuits at the subsequent stage can receive a plurality of output signals having different frequencies.
Further, according to the semiconductor integrated circuit according to this application example, there is no need to provide a frequency dividing circuit outside the semiconductor integrated circuit, so that the subsequent circuit can receive an output signal having good jitter characteristics.
Note that the first frequency dividing circuit and the second frequency dividing circuit can output an input signal as it is.
Therefore, the circuit at the subsequent stage of the semiconductor integrated circuit according to this application example can also receive an output signal having the same frequency as necessary.
Application Example 6 In the semiconductor integrated circuit according to the above application example, the first frequency divider circuit may be configured so that the second frequency divider circuit divides the first frequency-divided signal by the time required for the second frequency divider circuit to divide the first frequency-divided signal. A delay circuit for delaying one divided signal may be included.
According to the semiconductor integrated circuit of this application example, the delay circuit allows the first output circuit to receive the signal based on the first frequency-divided signal and the second output circuit to be based on the second frequency-divided signal. The time for receiving the signal can be adjusted.
Therefore, according to the semiconductor integrated circuit according to this application example, it is possible to generate a plurality of output signals with small skew.
Application Example 7 An oscillator according to this application example includes any one of the semiconductor integrated circuits described above, the vibration element, and a package that houses the semiconductor integrated circuit and the vibration element.
According to the oscillator according to this application example, the first output circuit and the second output circuit included in the semiconductor integrated circuit can output at least two signals with low jitter based on the oscillation signal. If at least two signals are supplied to a plurality of circuits, there is no need to provide an external fan-out buffer and branch the signal.
Therefore, even if the output signal is input to a plurality of circuits, it is possible to reduce the deterioration of the jitter characteristic.
Application Example 8 In the oscillator according to the application example, the vibration element may be a surface acoustic wave resonator.
The resonator element of the oscillator according to this application example is a surface acoustic wave resonator (hereinafter, SAW resonator).
In the SAW resonator, a signal with a higher oscillation frequency can be obtained as the period of the comb-shaped electrode is made smaller.
Therefore, the oscillator according to this application example can be downsized while realizing a high oscillation frequency.
Application Example 9 In the oscillator according to the application example, a first output terminal that outputs a signal from the first output circuit, and a second output terminal that outputs a signal from the second output circuit The output terminal of the J017384601 51 is arranged along a first side of the package, and the second output terminal is a second side facing the first side of the package. May be arranged along.
According to the oscillator according to this application example, interference between the output signal from the first output circuit and the output signal from the second output circuit is avoided, and a plurality of output signals with small skew and good jitter characteristics are generated. can do.
Furthermore, in order to avoid interference, the first output circuit and the second output circuit may be laid out separately on the semiconductor substrate.
Application Example 10 An electronic device according to this application example includes any of the above semiconductor integrated circuits or oscillators.
Application Example 11 A moving object according to this application example includes any of the above semiconductor integrated circuits or oscillators.
According to these application examples, since a plurality of circuits subsequent to the semiconductor integrated circuit or the oscillator can receive a plurality of output signals with low jitter, a highly reliable electronic device or moving object can be realized.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS FIG. 1 is a block diagram of an oscillator according to an embodiment.
FIG. 2 is a diagram showing a configuration example of a SAW resonator and an oscillation circuit.
FIG. 3 is a diagram showing a configuration example of a frequency dividing circuit and an output circuit.
4 is a diagram illustrating the timing of the signal of the oscillator according to the present embodiment.
5 is a diagram showing an example of the arrangement of the terminal of the oscillator according to the present embodiment.
FIG. 6 is a functional block diagram of the electronic device.
FIG. 7 is a diagram showing an example of an appearance of the electronic device.
FIG. 8 is a diagram showing an example of a moving object.
9 is a diagram showing an example of generating a plurality of output signals by the oscillator of the comparative example.
BEST MODE FOR CARRYING OUT THE INVENTION Hereinafter, preferred embodiments of the present invention will be described in detail with reference to the drawings.
The embodiments described below do not unduly limit the contents of the present invention described in the claims.
In addition, all of the configurations described below are not necessarily essential components of the invention.
1. Oscillator FIG. 1 is a diagram illustrating a configuration of an oscillator 1 of the present embodiment.
The oscillator 1 includes a SAW resonator 26 (an example of a vibrating element) and the semiconductor integrated circuit 10.
The SAW resonator 26 is connected to the oscillation circuit 12 included in the semiconductor integrated circuit 10.
J017384601 6 The oscillator 1 has a total of 14 terminals.
The power supply voltages VDD1, VDD2, and VDD3 are supplied to the terminals T1, T2, and T3, respectively, and the ground voltage VSS is supplied to the terminals T4 and T5.
Note that the power supply voltages VDD1 to VDD3 are all the same voltage.
The output enable signal of the oscillator 1 is input to the terminal T6.
When the output enable signal is at a high level, a clock signal is output from terminals T7 to T14.
Terminals T7 to T14 are used to output four clock signals that are differential signals.
Terminals T7 and T8 output a non-inverted signal 116P and an inverted signal 116N of the first clock signal, respectively.
Terminals T9 and T10 output a non-inverted signal 117P and an inverted signal 117N of the second clock signal, respectively.
The terminals T11 and T12 output a non-inverted signal 118P and an inverted signal 118N of the third clock signal, respectively.
The terminals T13 and T14 output a non-inverted signal 119P and an inverted signal 119N of the fourth clock signal, respectively.
The semiconductor integrated circuit 10 includes an oscillation circuit 12, a control unit 13, a first frequency divider 15, a first output circuit 16, a second frequency divider 17, and a second output circuit 18.
The first frequency dividing circuit 15 and the first output circuit 16 operate by receiving the power supply voltage VDD1 from the terminal T1 (an example of a first power supply terminal).
The second frequency dividing circuit 17 and the second output circuit 18 operate by receiving the power supply voltage VDD2 from the terminal T2 (an example of a second power supply terminal).
Here, the first group 21 and the second group 22 divide the circuits of the semiconductor integrated circuit 10 by the source of the power supply voltage.
That is, the first frequency divider 15 and the first output circuit 16 operate at the power supply voltage VDD1, and the second frequency divider 17 and the second output circuit 18 operate at the power supply voltage VDD2.
Note that the oscillation circuit 12 and the control unit 13 may operate by receiving the power supply voltage VDD3 from the terminal T3.
For example, when the output from the second output circuit 18 is unnecessary, the oscillator 1 stops the supply of the power supply voltage VDD2 and stops the entire second group 22 to reduce power consumption.
In addition, for example, when the output from the first output circuit 16 is unnecessary, the oscillator 1 also stops supplying the power supply voltage VDD1, stops the entire first group 21 and the second group 22, and reduces power consumption. Can be suppressed.
Even in such a case, the oscillation circuit 12 and the control unit 13 can continue to operate.
The oscillation circuit 12 is connected to the SAW resonator 26 to form an oscillation loop.
The oscillation circuit 12 oscillates the SAW resonator 26 to generate an oscillation signal 112.
In this embodiment, the oscillation circuit 12 is connected to the SAW resonator 26. However, instead of the SAW resonator 26, an AT cut crystal resonator, an SC cut crystal resonator, a tuning fork type crystal resonator, and other piezoelectric And a vibrating element such as a vibrator or a MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical Systems) vibrator.
In addition, as the substrate material of the SAW resonator 26 and the vibration element, besides quartz, a piezoelectric single crystal such as lithium tantalate or lithium niobate, a piezoelectric material such as piezoelectric ceramics such as lead zirconate titanate, or a silicon semiconductor A material or the like may be used.
As the means for exciting the SAW resonator 26 or the vibrating element J017384601 7, a device using a piezoelectric effect or an electrostatic drive using Coulomb force may be used.
The output enable signal of the oscillator 1 is input to the control unit 13 via the terminal T6.
The control unit 13 controls whether to output a clock signal from the first output circuit 16 and the second output circuit 18 based on the output enable signal of the oscillator 1.
The control unit 13 controls whether to output the first clock signal and the second clock signal from the first output circuit 16 or to set it to a high impedance state by a control signal 216 based on the output enable signal of the oscillator 1. I do.
In addition, the control unit 13 controls the second output circuit 18 to output the third clock signal and the fourth clock signal or to set the high impedance state according to the control signal 218 based on the output enable signal of the oscillator 1. Control.
Then, the control unit 13 generates the control signal 215 and the control signal 217 based on the voltage level of the bonding option pad of the semiconductor integrated circuit 10 (not shown).
Then, the control unit 13 specifies the frequency division ratio of the first frequency dividing circuit 15 by the control signal 215.
Further, the control unit 13 specifies the frequency division ratio of the second frequency dividing circuit 17 using the control signal 217.
Note that the control unit 13 may instruct to stop or start the operation of the oscillation circuit 12 with a control signal (not shown).
Note that the control unit 13 may be a CPU.
At this time, there is a storage unit (not shown) storing the program, and the above control may be performed according to the output enable signal of the oscillator 1 and the program.
The signals output from the first output circuit 16 and the second output circuit 18 may be single-ended signals other than differential signals, or may be CMOS, LV-PECL, LV-TTL, LVDS, or HCSL. May be used.
Furthermore, at least one of the first output circuit and the second output circuit is set to a circuit configuration capable of outputting two or more of the signals of each type, and based on a signal input via the terminal T6. Control may be performed such that a signal output from at least one of the first output circuit and the second output circuit is switched by a signal output from the control unit 13.
The first frequency dividing circuit 15 frequency-divides the oscillation signal 112 to generate a first frequency-divided signal 114, and further generates a first frequency-divided delay signal 115 obtained by delaying the first frequency-divided signal 114. .
At this time, the frequency division ratio is determined by the control signal 215.
For example, the first frequency dividing circuit 15 can select a frequency dividing ratio of 1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8.
When the division ratio is 1, the oscillation signal 112 is output as it is as the first divided signal 114.
The first output circuit 16 includes two buffers for converting a single-ended input to a differential output.
Each buffer receives the signal 125 and differentially outputs it as a first clock signal and a second clock signal.
The first output circuit 16 selects, based on the control signal 216, whether to output the first clock signal and the second clock signal or to set the high impedance state to J017384601 8.
In the present embodiment, the number of buffers included in the first output circuit 16 is two, but may be one, or may be three or more.
Here, as shown in FIG. 1, the first output circuit 16 receives a signal 125 obtained by further delaying the first frequency-divided delay signal 115.
The signal 125 is a signal based on the first divided signal 114, and the relationship between the first divided signal 114 and the first divided delay signal 115 will be described later with reference to FIG.
The second frequency divider 17 receives the first frequency-divided signal 114 and the first frequency-divided delay signal 115, and outputs a signal 127.
The signal 127 is a signal based on the second frequency-divided signal 124, and the frequency division ratio of the second frequency divider 17 is determined by the control signal 217.
For example, the second frequency dividing circuit 17 can select a frequency dividing ratio of 1 or 1/2.
When the frequency division ratio is 1/2, the second frequency dividing circuit 17 sets the second frequency divided signal 124 whose frequency is の of the first frequency divided signal 114 as the signal 127.
When the frequency division ratio is 1, the second frequency dividing circuit 17 uses the first frequency-divided delay signal 115 as the signal 127.
The second output circuit 18 includes two buffers for converting a single-ended input to a differential output.
Each buffer receives the signal 127 and differentially outputs it as a third clock signal and a fourth clock signal.
The second output circuit 18 selects, based on the control signal 218, whether to output the third clock signal and the fourth clock signal, or to set a high impedance state.
In the present embodiment, the number of buffers included in the second output circuit 18 is two, but may be one, or may be three or more.
FIG. 2 is a diagram showing a detailed configuration of the SAW resonator 26 and the oscillation circuit 12.
The same signals as those in FIG. 1 are denoted by the same reference numerals, and description thereof will be omitted.
The SAW resonator 26 is configured by arranging a comb-shaped electrode 29 on a piezoelectric substrate along the propagation direction of a surface acoustic wave, and arranging grating reflectors 27A and 27B on both sides thereof.
The surface acoustic wave is excited by the central comb-shaped electrode 29, and the vibration energy of the surface acoustic wave excited by the grating reflectors 27A and 27B on both sides is reflected in the direction of the comb-shaped electrode 29, thereby forming the resonator (resonator). Make up.
Since the frequency of the SAW resonator 26 is determined by the electrode spacing, a high frequency can be easily obtained by photolithography and the size can be reduced.
The inverter 24, the feedback resistor 28, and the capacitors 41 and 42 are connected to the comb-shaped electrode 29 as shown in FIG.
The inverter 24 to which the feedback resistor 28 is connected functions as an analog amplifier circuit.
Then, the SAW resonator 26 is oscillated to generate an oscillation signal 112.
FIG. 3 is a diagram showing a detailed configuration of the first frequency dividing circuit 15, the first output circuit 16, the second frequency dividing circuit 17, and the second output circuit 18.
The same signals as those in FIGS. 1 and 2 are denoted by the same reference numerals, and description thereof will be omitted.
J017384601 9 The first frequency divider circuit 15 receives the oscillation signal 112, and generates signals whose frequencies are 1/2, 1/4, and 1/8 of the oscillation signal 112 with the flip-flops 150, 152, and 154, respectively. .
Then, the selector 156 selects these signals in accordance with the frequency division ratio specified by the control unit 13, and sets the signals as the first frequency-divided signal 114.
Here, the selector 156 can also select the oscillation signal 112 corresponding to the case where the division ratio is 1.
The selection signal S1 of the selector 156 corresponds to a part of the control signal 215 from the control unit 13.
The first frequency dividing circuit 15 delays the first frequency-divided signal 114 by the delay circuit 158 to generate a first frequency-divided delayed signal 115.
Here, the delay time by the delay circuit 158 is designed to be the same as the time required for the second frequency dividing circuit 17 to divide the first frequency-divided signal 114.
Further, the first frequency dividing circuit 15 includes a selector 172B having the same circuit configuration as the selector 172A included in the second frequency dividing circuit 17.
The selection signal S2 of the selector 172B is common to the selection signal S2 of the selector 172A of the second frequency dividing circuit 17.
Therefore, the timing at which the signal 125 from the first frequency divider 15 is input to the first output circuit 16 and the timing at which the signal 127 from the second frequency divider 17 is input to the second output circuit 18 And can be combined.
The selection signal S2 of the selector 172B corresponds to a part of the control signal 215 from the control unit 13.
The first output circuit 16 includes two buffers 160 and 162.
The buffers 160 and 162 receive the signal 125, which is a single-ended signal, and output a differential signal.
The buffer 160 outputs a non-inverted signal 116P and an inverted signal 116N of the first clock signal.
The buffer 162 outputs a non-inverted signal 117P and an inverted signal 117N of the second clock signal.
The first output circuit 16 can set the two buffers 160 and 162 to a high impedance state according to the control signal E12.
The control signal E12 corresponds to the control signal 216 from the control unit 13.
The second frequency dividing circuit 17 receives the first frequency-divided signal 114, and generates a second frequency-divided signal 124 having a frequency that is 1/2 of the frequency of the first frequency-divided signal 114 in the flip-flop 170.
Then, the selector 172A receives the first frequency-divided delay signal 115 and the second frequency-divided signal 124, and selects these signals as a signal 127 according to the frequency division ratio specified by the control unit 13.
That is, the selector 172A outputs the first frequency-divided delay signal 115 when the frequency division ratio is 1, and outputs the second frequency-divided signal 124 when the frequency division ratio is 1/2.
Note that the selection signal S2 of the selector 172A corresponds to the control signal 217 from the control unit 13.
Here, FIG. 4 shows the second frequency-divided signal 124, the first frequency-divided signal 114, and the first frequency-divided delay signal 115 when the frequency division ratio is 1/2 in the second frequency divider 17. FIG.
Until the second frequency dividing circuit 17 receives the first frequency-divided signal 114 and generates the second frequency-divided signal 124 by dividing the frequency, the time corresponding to the time t0 to the time t1 (that is, d0) is Take it.
J017384601 10 Here, the first frequency dividing circuit 15 includes a delay circuit 158 that causes a delay of d0.
Therefore, the phases of the first frequency-divided delay signal 115 and the second frequency-divided signal 124 can be matched (time t1 to time t8).
Therefore, four clock signals having the same phase can be output.
At time t2, time t4, time t6, and time t8 in FIG. 4, the rising of the first frequency-divided delay signal 115 corresponds to the falling of the second frequency-divided signal.
Therefore, when the first frequency-divided delay signal 115 and the second frequency-divided signal 124 are wired adjacently and in parallel, the jitter characteristic is likely to deteriorate.
In the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, as will be described later with reference to FIG. 5, such a deterioration in the jitter characteristics can be avoided by contriving the layout.
The second output circuit 18 includes two buffers 180, 182.
The buffers 180 and 182 receive the signal 127 that is a single-ended signal and output a differential signal.
The buffer 180 outputs a non-inverted signal 118P and an inverted signal 118N of the third clock signal.
The buffer 182 outputs a non-inverted signal 118P and an inverted signal 118N of the fourth clock signal.
The second output circuit 18 can set the two buffers 180 and 182 to a high impedance state according to the control signal E34.
The control signal E34 corresponds to the control signal 218 from the control unit 13.
In the present embodiment, the first output circuit 16 and the second output circuit 18 include the same number of buffers, but the number of buffers does not need to be the same, and the first output circuit 16, The second output circuits 18 can each include any number of buffers.
Here, FIG. 9 is a diagram illustrating a case where one clock signal from the oscillator 1001 of the comparative example is branched by the fan-out buffer 1020 to generate four clock signals.
In the case of FIG. 9, similarly to the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, finally, four clock signals can be generated.
The oscillator 1001 of the comparative example has four terminals.
The power supply voltage VDD is supplied to the terminal U1, and the ground voltage VSS is supplied to the terminal U2.
Terminals U3 and U4 are used to output one clock signal that is a differential signal.
Terminals U3 and U4 output a non-inverted signal 1116P and an inverted signal 1116N of the clock signal, respectively.
The oscillator 1001 includes a SAW resonator 1026, an oscillation circuit 1012, a control unit 1013, a frequency dividing circuit 1015, and an output circuit 1016.
The SAW resonator 1026, the oscillating circuit 1012, and the control unit 1013 correspond to the SAW resonator 26, the oscillating circuit 12, and the control unit 13 included in the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, respectively, and have the same functions. .
J017384601 The 11 divider circuit 1015 corresponds to the first divider circuit 15 included in the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, from which the delay circuit 158 and the selector 172B are omitted (see FIG. 3).
At this time, the output circuit 1016 receives, from the frequency dividing circuit 1015, a signal corresponding to the first frequency-divided signal 114 of the first frequency dividing circuit 15.
The output circuit 1016 corresponds to the first output circuit 16 included in the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment without the buffer 162 (see FIG. 3).
At this time, only the non-inverted signal 1116P and the inverted signal 1116N of the clock signal are output from the oscillator 1001 of the comparative example.
The fan-out buffer 1020 has a total of ten terminals.
Terminals V1 and V2 are input terminals for receiving a non-inverted signal 1116P and an inverted signal 1116N from the oscillator 1001, respectively.
The terminals V3 to V10 are used to output four clock signals as differential signals.
The terminals V3 to V10 correspond to the terminals T7 to T14 (see FIG. 1) of the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, respectively, and detailed description will be omitted.
The fan-out buffer 1020 divides the received non-inverted signal 1116P and inverted signal 1116N using buffers as shown in Fig. 9, and generates four clock signals with the same waveform and frequency as the input clock signal. I do.
Therefore, four clock signals can also be generated by combining the oscillator 1001 of the comparative example and the fan-out buffer 1020.
However, in the configuration of the comparative example, the fan-out buffer 1020 does not include the frequency divider, and cannot output clock signals of different frequencies as in the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment.
In addition, the external noise may be mixed in the wiring from the terminals U3 and U4 of the oscillator 1001 to the terminals V1 and V2 of the fan-out buffer 1020, and the waveform may be distorted due to the influence of the inductance and capacitance components of the wiring. May worsen.
Also, depending on the fan-out buffer 1020 to be selected, the internal delay may be different between the four clock signals.
However, the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment includes the second frequency divider 17 that divides the first frequency-divided signal 114 to generate the second frequency-divided signal 124.
Therefore, the frequency of the clock signal from buffer 160 and buffer 162 can be set to be different from the frequency of the clock signal from buffer 180 and buffer 182.
Further, in the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, up to the first output circuit 16 and the second output circuit 18 that output four clock signals are integrated on one semiconductor substrate.
Therefore, there is little possibility that external noise is mixed in the wiring between the terminals as in the comparative example, or the jitter characteristic is deteriorated due to the inductance component or the like.
Then, in the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, as described above, the timing at which the signal 125 from the first frequency dividing circuit 15 is input to the first output circuit 16 and the signal from the second frequency dividing circuit 17 The timing at which 1J017384601 12 27 is input to the second output circuit 18 can be matched.
Therefore, it is possible to make it difficult for the jitter characteristic to be deteriorated due to the splitting of the first frequency-divided signal 114.
FIG. 5 is a diagram showing an example of the arrangement of the terminals T1 to T14 of the oscillator 1 according to the present embodiment.
Here, the oscillator 1 shown in FIG. 5 is a view of the package as viewed from above, but a part of the region R1 is transmitted to explain the internal semiconductor integrated circuit 10.
The same elements as those in FIGS. 1 to 3 are denoted by the same reference numerals, and description thereof will be omitted.
In FIG. 5, the terminals T1 to T14 of the oscillator 1 according to the present embodiment are clockwise from the upper left of the paper, the terminals T2 (terminal name: VDD2), the terminal T14 (terminal name: XOUT4), and the terminal T13 (terminal name: OUT4), terminal T12 (pin name: XOUT3), terminal T11 (pin name: OUT3), terminal T6 (pin name: OE), terminal T4 (pin name: VSS), terminal T9 (pin name: OUT2), terminal T10 (Pin name: XOUT2), terminal T7 (pin name: OUT1), terminal T8 (pin name: XOUT1), terminal T1 (pin name: VDD1), terminal T5 (pin name: VSS), terminal T3 (pin name: VDD3) ).
In the following, for convenience of description, a terminal may be specified using a terminal name.
Then, as shown in the region R1, the oscillator 1 includes wirings w1 to w14 electrically connected to the terminals T1 to T14, respectively.
A plurality of solid squares arranged on the semiconductor integrated circuit 10 are contact pads, and are electrically connected to the wirings w1 to w14 by wire bonding.
Here, in the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, OUT1, XOUT1, OUT2, and XOUT2 that output the first and second clock signals from the first output circuit 16 included in the first group 21 (see FIG. 1). Is arranged on the lower side of the paper (an example of a first side).
VDD1 for supplying power to the first group 21 is also arranged on the lower side of the drawing.
On the other hand, OUT3, XOUT3, OUT4, and XOUT4 that output the third and fourth clock signals from the second output circuit 18 included in the second group 22 (see FIG. (An example of a side).
VDD2 for supplying power to the second group 22 is also arranged on the upper side of the drawing.
In the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, OUT1, XOUT1, OUT2, and XOUT2 (one example of a first output terminal) and OUT3, XOUT3, OUT4, and XOUT4 (one example of a second output terminal) are opposite sides. Are arranged in each of the.
Therefore, the oscillator 1 can reduce interference between the first and second clock signals and the third and fourth clock signals, generate a plurality of clock signals with small variations and good jitter characteristics.
At this time, since different power supply terminals are used in the first group 21 and the second group 22, the noise wraparound from one output signal to the other output signal via a common power supply is also J017384601 13 small.
Therefore, a problem that noise from the low-frequency third and fourth clock signals is superimposed on the high-frequency first and second clock signals and is observed as low-frequency spurious is unlikely to occur.
Further, it is assumed that the semiconductor integrated circuit 10 is divided into a region R2 near the upper side and a region R3 near the lower side.
At this time, circuits constituting the first group 21, such as the first frequency dividing circuit 15 and the first output circuit 16, are arranged in the region R3.
On the other hand, circuits constituting the second group 22, such as the second frequency divider 17 and the second output circuit 18, are arranged in the region R2.
By arranging the circuits in this way, even if integrated on one semiconductor substrate, signals belonging to the first group 21 and signals belonging to the second group 22 that may have different frequencies interfere with each other. Can be difficult.
In the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment, the SAW resonator 26 is arranged in a region R4 remote from the semiconductor integrated circuit 10. However, for miniaturization, for example, the SAW resonator 26 overlaps with the semiconductor integrated circuit 10 (three-dimensionally , That is, in front of or behind the paper surface).
As described above, even if the oscillator 1 of the present embodiment integrates a plurality of buffers (buffers 160, 162, 180, and 182) and the oscillation circuit 12 on one semiconductor substrate, the output signal from the buffer (the second Deterioration of the first to fourth clock signals) can be reduced.
2. Electronic Device The electronic device 300 of the present embodiment will be described with reference to FIGS.
The same elements as those in FIGS. 1 to 5 are denoted by the same reference numerals and symbols, and description thereof is omitted.
FIG. 6 is a functional block diagram of the electronic device 300.
The electronic device 300 includes an oscillation unit 200 including the oscillation circuit 12 and the SAW resonator 26, a CPU (Central Processing Unit) 320, an operation unit 330, a ROM (Read Only Memory) 340, a RAM (Random Access Memory) 350, and a communication unit. It includes a 360, a display unit 370, and a sound output unit 380.
Note that the electronic device 300 may have a configuration in which some of the components (each unit) in FIG. 6 are omitted or changed, or other components are added.
The oscillating unit 200 supplies a clock pulse not only to the CPU 320 but also to each unit (not shown).
The oscillating unit 200 corresponds to the oscillator 1 in which the semiconductor integrated circuit 10 and the SAW resonator 26 are connected.
However, FIG. 6 shows only the oscillation circuit 12 of the semiconductor integrated circuit 10.
The CPU 320 performs various calculation processes and control processes using clock pulses output from the oscillation unit 200 (corresponding to the clock signal from the semiconductor integrated circuit 10) according to a program stored in the ROM 340 or the like.
Specifically, the CPU 320 performs various processes according to an operation signal from the operation unit 330, a process of controlling the communication unit 360 to perform data communication with the outside, and displays various information on the display unit 370. For example, a process of transmitting a display signal for causing the sound output unit 380 to output various sounds is performed.
The operation unit 330 is an input device including an operation key, a button switch, and the like, and outputs an operation signal according to a user operation to the CPU 320.
The ROM 340 stores programs and data for the CPU 320 to perform various calculation processes and control processes.
The RAM 350 is used as a work area of the CPU 320, and temporarily stores programs and data read from the ROM 340, data input from the operation unit 330, calculation results executed by the CPU 320 according to various programs, and the like.
The communication unit 360 performs various controls for establishing data communication between the CPU 320 and the external device.
The display unit 370 is a display device configured by an LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) or the like, and displays various information based on a display signal input from the CPU 320.
The sound output unit 380 is a device that outputs sound such as a speaker.
As described above, the oscillating unit 200 (the oscillator 1) supplies a plurality of clocks having good jitter characteristics.
At this time, the oscillation unit 200 can supply a high-speed clock to the CPU 320 and supply a low-speed clock to other functional blocks.
At this time, since the fan-out buffer 1020 is unnecessary, the size of the electronic device 300 can be reduced.
Further, in order to avoid the occurrence of jitter, it is not necessary to spend time on the wiring layout, and the design efficiency of the electronic device 300 can be improved.
Various types of electronic device 300 can be considered.
For example, personal computers (e.g., mobile personal computers, laptop personal computers, tablet personal computers), mobile terminals such as mobile phones, digital still cameras, inkjet ejection devices (e.g., inkjet printers), routers and switches Storage area network equipment, local area network equipment, server equipment that sends and receives various data over the network, mobile terminal base station equipment, televisions, video cameras, video recorders, car navigation devices, pagers, electronic notebooks (communications) Electronic dictionaries, calculators, electronic game machines, game controllers, word processors, workstations, videophones, security TV monitors Electronic binoculars, POS terminals, medical equipment (e.g., electronic thermometer, sphygmomanometer, blood glucose meter, electrocardiogram measurement device, ultrasonic diagnostic device, electronic endoscope), fish finder, various measurement devices, instruments (e.g., vehicle, aircraft) , Ship instruments), flight simulator, head mounted display, motion tracing, motion tracking, motion controller, PDR (pedestrian position and orientation measurement), and the like.
FIG. 7 is a diagram illustrating an example of an external appearance of a smartphone that is an example of the electronic device 300.
The smartphone as the electronic device 300 includes a button as the operation unit 330 and an LCD as the display unit 370.
The use of the oscillation unit 200 (the oscillator 1) can reduce the size of the smartphone, which is the electronic device 300, and can improve the design efficiency.
3. Moving Object The moving object 400 of the present embodiment will be described with reference to FIG.
FIG. 8 is a diagram (top view) illustrating an example of the moving object 400 of the present embodiment.
The moving body 400 shown in FIG. 8 includes an oscillator 410, controllers 420, 430, and 440 that perform various controls such as an engine system, a brake system, and a keyless entry system, a battery 450, and a backup battery 460. .
Note that the moving object according to the present embodiment may have a configuration in which some of the components (each unit) in FIG. 8 are omitted or changed, or other components are added.
The oscillating unit 410 corresponds to the oscillator 1 described above.
Although detailed descriptions of other components are omitted, high reliability is required to perform control necessary for moving the moving body.
For example, by providing a backup battery 460 in addition to the battery 450, reliability is improved.
It is preferable that the oscillating unit 410 also include a backup oscillating unit 410 in order to improve reliability.
That is, it is preferable to provide a plurality of clocks.
At this time, by using the oscillator 1 as the oscillating unit 410, a plurality of high-quality clocks having good jitter characteristics can be used.
Note that various types of moving objects are conceivable as the moving object 400, and examples thereof include automobiles (including electric vehicles), aircraft such as jet aircraft and helicopters, ships, rockets, and artificial satellites.
The present invention is not limited to this embodiment, and various modifications can be made within the scope of the present invention.
The above-described embodiments and modifications are merely examples, and the present invention is not limited to these.
For example, each embodiment and each modified example can be appropriately combined.
The invention includes substantially the same configuration as the configuration described in the above embodiment (for example, a configuration having the same function, method, and result, or a configuration having the same object and effect).
Further, the invention includes a configuration in which a non-essential part of the configuration described in the embodiment is replaced.
Further, the invention includes a configuration having the same operation and effect as the configuration described in the embodiment or a configuration capable of achieving the same object.
The invention also includes a configuration in which a known technique is added to the configuration described in the embodiment.
EXPLANATION OF SYMBOLS 1 oscillator, 10 semiconductor integrated circuit, 12 oscillation circuit, 13 control unit, 15 first frequency divider circuit, 16 first output circuit, 17 second frequency divider circuit, 18 second output circuit, 21 1st group, 22 2nd group, 24 inverters, 26 SAW resonators, 27A grating reflector, 27B grating reflector, 28 feedback resistor, 29 comb-shaped electrode, 41 capacitor, 42 capacitor, 112 oscillation signal, 114 1st Divided signal, 115 1st divided delay signal, 116N inverted signal, 116P non-inverted signal, 117N inverted signal, 117P non-inverted signal, 118N inverted signal, 118P non-inverted signal, 119N inverted signal, 119P non-inverted signal, 124 Second divided signal, 125 signal, 127 signal, 150 flip-flop, 152 flip-flop, 154 flip-flop, 156 selector, 158 delay circuit, 160 buffer, 162 buffer, 170 flip-flop, 172A selector, 172B selector, 180 Buffer, 182 buffer, 200 oscillation unit, 215 control signal, 216 control signal, 217 control signal, 218 control signal, 300 electronic equipment, 320 CPU, 330 operation unit, 340 ROM, 350 RAM, 360 communication unit, 370 display unit, 380 sound output unit, 400 mobile unit, 410 oscillation unit, 420 controller, 450 battery, 460 backup battery, 1001 oscillator, 1012 oscillation circuit, 1013 control unit, 1015 divider circuit, 1016 output circuit, 1020 fan out buffer, 1026 SAW resonator, 1116N inverted signal, 1116P non-inverted signal, E12 control signal, E34 control signal, R1 area, R2 area, R3 area, R4 area, S1 selection signal, S2 selection signal, T1 terminal, T2 terminal, T3 terminal, T4 terminal, T5 terminal, T6 terminal, T7 terminal, T8 terminal, T9 terminal, T10 terminal, T11 terminal, T12 terminal, T13 terminal, T14 terminal, U14 terminal, U2 terminal, U3 terminal, U4 terminal, V1 terminal, V2 terminal , V3 pin, V10 pin, VDD power supply voltage, VDD1 power supply VDD2 power supply voltage, VDD3 power supply voltage, VSS ground voltage, w1 to w14 Wiring J017384601 17 Document name Claims Claim 1 An oscillating unit that oscillates a vibrating element to generate an oscillation signal, and a signal based on the oscillation signal. A semiconductor integrated circuit comprising: a first output unit and a second output unit for outputting; and a control unit for controlling the first output unit and the second output unit.
An oscillation circuit that oscillates a vibration element to generate an oscillation signal on a semiconductor substrate, a first output circuit and a second output circuit that output a signal based on the oscillation signal, and the first output A semiconductor integrated circuit, comprising: a circuit; and a control unit that controls an operation of the second output circuit.
3. The semiconductor integrated circuit according to claim 2, wherein the control unit independently controls operations of the first output circuit and the second output circuit.
4. The semiconductor integrated circuit includes: a first power supply terminal; and a second power supply terminal, wherein the first output circuit is supplied with a power supply voltage from the first power supply terminal; 4. The semiconductor integrated circuit according to claim 2, wherein said output circuit is supplied with a power supply voltage from said second power supply terminal.
The semiconductor integrated circuit may further include: a first frequency divider that divides the oscillation signal to generate a first frequency-divided signal; and a second frequency divider that divides the first frequency-divided signal. And a second frequency divider circuit that generates a frequency-divided signal. The first frequency-divider circuit is supplied with a power supply voltage from the first power supply terminal, and generates a signal based on the first frequency-divided signal. The second frequency divider outputs a signal based on the second frequency-divided signal to the second output circuit, the second frequency divider being supplied with a power supply voltage from the second power supply terminal. 5. The semiconductor integrated circuit according to claim 4, wherein
6. The first frequency divider circuit includes a delay circuit that delays the first frequency-divided signal by a time required for the second frequency divider to divide the first frequency-divided signal. 6. The semiconductor integrated circuit according to claim 5, wherein
7. An oscillator comprising: the semiconductor integrated circuit according to claim 1; the resonator; and a package in which the semiconductor integrated circuit and the resonator are housed.
8. The oscillator according to claim 7, wherein the vibration element is a surface acoustic wave resonator.
9.A first output terminal that outputs a signal from the first output circuit, and a second output terminal that outputs a signal from the second output circuit, wherein the first output terminal Is disposed along a first side of the package, and the second output terminal is disposed along a second side of the package facing the first side. 2. The oscillator according to claim 1.
10. An electronic device comprising the semiconductor integrated circuit according to claim 1.
A moving object including the semiconductor integrated circuit according to any one of claims 1 to 3.
J017384601 19 Abstract of document name Abstract: To provide a semiconductor integrated circuit or the like capable of reducing deterioration of jitter characteristics even when an output signal is input to a plurality of circuits.
A semiconductor integrated circuit in which an oscillation circuit that oscillates a vibration element to generate an oscillation signal, and a plurality of output circuits that output a signal based on the oscillation signal, are integrated on a single semiconductor substrate; And a package accommodating the element.
In the semiconductor integrated circuit 10, among the plurality of output circuits, the operations of the first output circuit 16 and the second output circuit 18 are controlled independently of each other.
